:path: de/line-category
:lang: en
:title: Line Catgories in Germany

Line Catgories in Germany
=========================

Over the years, several categories for railways have been established
in Germany. In the early days, railways were a matter regulated by
the various German states and as such regulation differed somewhat.
However, the basic categories have been quite similar. After the
German unification of 1871, this regulation was step by step moved to
imperial and later federal level.

Regular railways are now being operated under the *Eisenbahn-Bau- und
Betriebsordnung* (or EBO, earlier abbreviated as BO), a federal
regulation. They are categorized either as primary or secondary
railways, *Hauptbahn* or *Nebenbahn* in German. The regulation puts
higher requirements on primary railway but in turn also allows higher
speeds.

The fact that the rules are different for operation entirely within
the limits of a station -- mostly allowing for shunting, has lead to
the categorization of some lines with very limited freight service as
being part of a station. This would be termed as *Bahnhofsgleis* or
station track in German.

Before World War II, some states had a third category of tertiary
railways. These were regulated by state law and had been established
to encourage railways being build in rural areas by relaxing
requirements. Prussia was very successful in this, where there were
lots of these railways, named *Kleinbahn* there. Other names where
used in different states such as *Lokalbahn*. After 1945, most of
these railways were closed down following widespread motorization and
most states abandoned this category, putting the remaining railways
under secondary railway regulation. The only exception is the state
of Berlin where there this category exists still.

Narrow gauge railways have their own regulatory regime, the federal
*Eisenbahn-Bau- und Betriebsordnung für Schmalspurbahnen*. Because
the regulation is in large parts identical to that for regular
secondary railways we classify these as *Nebenbahn* within the
project. In the past, many narrow gauge railways have been operated
as tertiary railways. These receive the *Kleinbahn* category.

Trams, again, have their own regime. The regulation is called
*Verordnung über den Bau und Betrieb der Straßenbahnen* and is
abbreviated as BOStrab. On occasion, regular railways have been
re-designated as trams to benefit from the far more relaxed
requirements for trams thus allowing cheaper operation of the line.

Finally, there are some railways that have not been licensed for
public transportation. These are usually industrial railways such as
the railways of mining corporations and short tracks leading to
factories. These again have their own regulation laid out by the
states and are either called *Verordnung über den Bau und Betrieb von
Anschlussbahnen* (BOA) or *Eisenbahn-Bau- und Betriebsordnung für
Anschlussbahnen* (EBOA). Within the project we use the term
Anschlussbahn. 

